what is static file in express?
ans --> .html, .css, js , .jpng they all are static file

let we have to make a template/page/view -->
so we make it in views folder the file like dog.ejs,etc..

similarilyy we have our public file where we store our static file.

the name like public and views are convention not compulsary.


our express already knows the path till the public folder. we need to specify path after that..


we can make million of files but repeating them is not good

we will write the header part and bottom part which repeat itself to a seperate place 
and for different body we will call them. which eventually increase code reusability.


so for this purpose we crete one more folder partials inside the views folder.
and create two more file inside partials 1) header.ejs and 2) footer.ejs


Get V/s Post -->  


1) get -->
this should be used to retrieve or fetch the data.
can we send data using get --> yes lekin humko aisa karna nahi chhiye. kyunki here data is available in your url as query parameter.

get request is less secure kyunki url mein data najar aa jata hai.

data sent using get is the plain string and only available as a query parameter.

limited amount of data can be sent only 4096(ns).

2) post -->

this should be used to make the changes in the server (DB).

here the data is available as "request.body".

this is more secure kyunki url mein data nahi hota

data of different type can be sent eg. text, xml, json.

there is no limit which means huge huge amount of data can be sent.

get is the default method if we submit a form.


strongly coupled application --> aisi application jismein basic path pata hota hai usko strongly coupled application bolte hn.

req.body by default undefined hota hai.
req.body contains data in the form of  key value pair.

our express already know the path till public folder, you just need to tell the path after that.

we can make millions of file but it does not mean ki mein ek hi file baar baar repeat karun.

if we have to bread the code in components then we have to make a folder inside view named partials in this we can make various components files.



views --> template --> app.set()

public -->  static --> app.use()



what is the default method when we submit a form?
the method is Get.